#summary About the Corkami project
#labels Featured
Corkami is the name of the project that I started, to share my findings and experiments. (_Corkami_ doesn't mean anything btw, except maybe 'daughters' in polish, but that's a coincidence)

Here are the guidelines I'm *trying* to follow (I only work on it in my spare time, at home, on a netbook):
 * pure technical content, with as much detail as possible
 * free
  * to browse (no annoying layout, no ads, ...)
  * to download (no login required)
  * to test (pre-compiled proof of concepts included)
  * to modify (BSD Licence, complete sources included, even for pictures and documents, using open-source tools)
 * constantly updated (wiki format)
 * easy to bring with you (printable cheats sheets and graphs)

When I learn something new, I code a small !PoC that just focus on this specific point. And when I have enough !PoCs on a subject, I write a summary page for it. But my !PoCs are the most up to date part, so be sure to check the nightly builds!

That's why it ended up here, after many different tries, as a project on google code. It's not perfect (the wiki is _sub-optimal_ for now), but better than anything else (blog, knoll, site,...) I tried so far).

Hope you like it,

Ange

[http://twitter.com/#!/ange4771 @ange4771] ([http://twitter.com/#!/corkami @corkami] for news only)

Comments, critics, suggestions, etc... are welcome.

=landmarks=
== step 1.5 (2011/12/30) ==
 * Thanks to Candid Wüest and FX for pushing me (I initially didn't plan that at all, in both cases), I presented at [http://code.google.com/p/corkami/wiki/hashdays2011 Hashdays] and [http://code.google.com/p/corkami/wiki/BerlinSidesX2 BerlinSides].
  * Both were great experiences, and as things went not too wrong, I had a good time, while being able to express myself freely, and experimenting on making presentations.
  * I spend maybe too much time on them, but I have my own personal style now, and I'll definitely reiterate the experience next year.

This unplanned extra step makes this year 2011 even better. It was great altogether!
== step 1 (2011/10/14) ==
 * the basics are now covered: [x86oddities x86] and [PE].
 * the style of publication reached a suitable form:
  * wiki pages with proof of concepts, and quoted snippets of code ([PE], [x86oddities x86] [PDFTricks PDF])
  * pdf made from svg ([http://code.google.com/p/corkami/downloads/list?q=pdf cheat sheets])
  * screencasts, with Wink ([http://rejava.sourceforge.net/hello.html reJava] [https://sites.google.com/site/corkami/ollydbg-tracing OllyDbg tracing])

so Corkami can step up and move on to the next level, following the same methods but tackling more advanced topics such as malware/packer analysis.

= eternal thanks =
these people were beyond helpful or supportive:
 * Adam Błaszczyk
 * Cathal Mullaney
 * Peter Ferrie

if you ever meet them, pay them a beer !

==acknowledgements==
a lot of people contributed (directly or not) to this project:
 Alexander Matrosov,
 BeatriX, Bruce Dang, 
 Candid Wüest, Costin Ionescu,
 Damien Saint Macary, deroko, Donato Ferrante, Didier Stevens, 
 Elia Florio, Elias Bachaalany, Ero Carrera, Eugeny Suslikov,
 Frank Boldewin,
 Georg Wicherski, Gil Dabah, Guillaume Delugré, Guillaume Lovet, Gynvael Coldwin,
 Heather Shannon,
 Igor Skochinsky, Ilfak Guilfanov, Ivanlef0u,
 Jean-Baptiste Bédrune, j00ru, Jim Leonard, Jon Larimer,
 Karthik Selvaraj, Kazumasa Itabashi, Kris Kaspersky,
 Oleh Yuschuk,
 Mark Vincent Yason, Markus Hinderhofer, Mircea Ciubotariu, Moritz Kroll,
 Nicolas Brulez, Nicolas Fallière,
 Rewolf, Robert !McArdle,
 Sami Koivu, Sebastian Biallas, Sebastian Porst, StalkR,
 Tomislav Pericin,
 Yoann Guillot
 .
and those who pulled me forward: 

 Andreas Naive,
 Charles !McDonald, CrackZ,
 Dimedrol,
 Fabrice Catoir, Fravia,
 Kostya Kortchinsky, 
 Nicola Salmoria,
 Omar Cornut,
 ...