#summary Explaining what’s a computer virus to grandma

*Son, what’s a computer virus?*

A computer program that does something malicious.

*Why would someone create that?*

There can be many reasons, but an easy one is: for money! Since people connect to their bank account with their computer via the Internet, a virus can steal money by wiring it somewhere else. Like a guy who’s spying on your PIN at the ATM.

*But if you have a virus on the computer, you can see it, no?*

If the virus is good enough, no.

*Some people make good viruses?*

Some people earn a lot of money with them, so they make good viruses.

*But, how do you get a virus on your computer?*

Someone puts a fake message somewhere, asking you to click, and `*`boom`*`, you’re infected.

*So there is nothing that can tell you if a program is malicious?*

There are programs for that. They’re called ‘antivirus’.

*So with an anti-virus, you’re safe?*

Hopefully, yes. But sometimes, they can get through the cracks, or if your antivirus is too old.

*So in the end, you just have to be careful, like in real life?*

Sadly, that’s not enough. Sometimes, there are mistakes in your computer programs. Big mistakes that someone can use to put a virus on your computer remotely.

*Then, we can’t do anything?*

Normally, these mistakes are quickly fixed. But you have to update your computer yourself, otherwise you’ll still be in danger.

*Update what?*

The programs that you use regularly on your computer... Windows, Acrobat, Flash, Java,

*But if you are worried about something, just use an antivirus, no?*

If there is already a virus on your computer, and it’s an advanced one, no. It’s too late.

*Then, the only choice is to completely reset the computer?*

If it’s a very advanced virus, no. It’s too late anyway.


*So, to be safe, we need to update regularly, have an anti-virus program, and be careful ?*

Exactly! If any of the 3 are missing, you're at risk. 