#summary x86 Opcodes

= Introduction =

  * this page gathers one line description of opcodes, and a few specific details.

  * UsermodeTest is the practice counterpart of this page. It uses each opcode, and check the result.


  * all exceptions triggers and all calls can be used to get current IP.
    for exception triggers:
{{{
structured_exception_handler:
    mov eax, [esp + 0ch]
    mov eax, dword [eax + 0b8h] 
=> eax = eip of the trigger
}}}

  * Conditional jumps can have a 2e/3e BRANCH TAKEN/NOT TAKEN prefix. there is no official way to assemble nor disassemble them.

  * Calls, `[`conditional`]` jumps, loops, returns, can operate on EIP or IP, with a 66 prefix. there is no standard way to assemble nor disassemble them.
=General=

==standard==

===nop=== 
does nothing.
{{{
nop
}}}

maybe exchange `*`ax with `*`ax :)

===fwait===
waits for fpu stuff to be finished

*NOP*

===Xfence===
*NOP*
sfence, mfence, lfence

serializing stuff. 


===prefetchnta===
*NOP*

cpu hint

===hint nop===
cpu hint, nop with operand

never triggers exceptions

===mov===
move
{{{
mov eax, 3
=> eax = 3
}}}
privileged when with dr`*` and cr`*`

===cmovXX===
mov on condition
{{{
start: CF, eax, ebx = 0, 0, 3
cmovc eax, ebx
=> eax = 0
}}}

===lea===
lea x, `[`y`]` = mov x,y
{{{
start: eax = 3
lea eax, [eax * 4 + 203A]
=> eax = 2046
}}}

*64 bits only* can be used to get IP directly
{{{
48 8d 05 00000000: lea rax, [rip]
}}}

===movzx===
mov and extend with zeroes
{{{
start: al = -1
movzx ecx, al
=> ecx = ff
}}}

===movsx===
mov and extend with the sign
{{{
start: al = -3
movsx ecx, al
=> ecx = -3
}}}

====movsxd=====
movsx's *64 bit only* counterpart
{{{
start: eax = -3
movsxd rcx, eax
=> rcx = -3
}}}

===xchg===
swap contents
{{{
start: al, bl = 1, 2
xchg al, bl
=> al, bl = 2, 1
}}}

atomic operation. lock prefix not needed

===movs===
mov ds:`[`edi`]`, es:`[`esi`]`, and inc (or dec) esi and edi

===lods===
mov `*`ax, es:`[`esi`]`, and inc (or dec) esi

===stos===
mov ds:`[`edi`]`, `*`ax and inc (or dec) edi

===add===
addition
{{{
start: eax = 3
add eax, 3
=> eax = 6
}}}

===adc===
add, with carry
{{{
start: CF, eax = 1, 3
adc eax, 3
=> CF, eax = 0, 7
}}}

===xadd===
add and exchange
{{{
start: al, bl = 1, 2
xadd al, bl
=> al, bl = 3, 1
}}}

===sub ===
substraction
{{{
start: eax = 6
sub eax, 3
=> eax = 3
}}}

===fstenv===
*GET EIP*
the FPU knows the address of the last executed fpu instruction. so, to get the current IP, use any FPU opcode - even FNOP - then store the FPU environment in memory via F(N)STENV:
{{{
@last_fpu:
    fnop
    fnstenv [fpuenv]
    mov edx,[fpuenv.DataPointer]
=> edx = @last_fpu
}}}

===sbb===
sub, with borrow
{{{
start: CF, eax = 1, 6
sbb eax, 3
=> eax = 2
}}}

===inc===
add 1
{{{
start: eax = 0
inc eax
=> eax = 1
}}}

===dec ===
sub 1
{{{
start: eax = 7
dec eax
=> eax = 6
}}}

===neg===
negative
{{{
start: al = 1
neg al
=> al = -1
}}}

===div===
divide ax/dx:ax/edx:eax by operand. Quo/Rem are in al:ah/ax:dx/eax:edx
{{{
start: ax, bl = 35, 11
div bl
=> ax = 0203
}}}

===idiv===
same, with sign

===mul===
multiply

same registers as div
{{{
start: al, bl = 11, 3
mul bl
=> ax = 33
}}}

===imul===
signed mul. has a 3 operands version
{{{
start: eax = 11
imul eax, eax, 3
=> eax = 33
}}}

===aaa===
ascii adjust after BCD addition
{{{
start: ax, bx = 304, 307
add ax, bx
aaa
=> ax = 701
}}}

===aas===
ascii adjust after substraction
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1, 4
sub al, bl
aas
=> ax = 7
}}}

===aam===
decimal to BCD
{{{
start: ax = 35
aam
=> ax = 305
}}}

===aad===
BCD to decimal:
{{{
start: ax = 305
aad
=> ax = 35
}}}

===daa===
decimal adjust after addition
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1234, 537
add ax, bx
daa
=> ax = 1771
}}}

===das===
decimal adjust after substraction
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1771, 1234
sub ax, bx
das
=> ax = 537
}}}

===or===
or
{{{
start: eax = 1010b
or eax, 0110b
=> eax = 1110b
}}}

===and ===
and
{{{
start: eax = 1010b
and eax, 0110b
=> eax = 0010b
}}}

===xor ===
exclusive or
{{{
start: eax = 1010b
xor eax, 0110b
=> eax = 1100b
}}}

===not===
logical not:
{{{
start: al = 1010b
not al
=> al = 11110101b
}}}

===rol===
left rotation
{{{
start: eax = 1010b
rol eax, 3
=> eax = 1010000b
}}}

===ror===
right rotation
{{{
start: al= 1010b
ror al, 3
=> al = 1000001b
}}}

===rcl===
rol over carry
{{{
start: CF, al = 1, 1010b
rcl al, 3
=> al = 1010100b
}}}

===rcr===
ror over carry
{{{
start: CF, al = 1, 1010b, 1
rcr al, 3
=> al = 10100001b
}}}

===shl===
shift left (=sal)
{{{
start: al = 1010b
shl al, 2
=> al = 101000b
}}}

===shr===
shift right
{{{
start: al = 1010b
shr al, 2
=> al = 10b
}}}

===sar===
arithmetic shr (propagates sign)
{{{
start: al = -8
sar al, 2
=> al = -2
}}}

===shld===
shift and concatenate
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1111b, 010...0b
shld ax, bx, 3
=> ax = 1111010b
}}}

===shrd===
same as shld, in the right direction
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1101001b, 101b
shrd ax, bx, 3
=> ax = 10100...001101b
}}}

===l*s===
lds/lss/les/lfs/lgs

loads register and segment
{{{
[ebx] = 12345678, 0
lds eax, [ebx]
=> ds = 0; eax = 12345678%ds x, [y]
=> ds = [y+4] and x = [y]
}}}

===loopCC===
dec ecx. jump if ecx is 0 and extra condition

===repCC===
repeat operation, decrease counter. stop if condition met or counter is 0

===jecxz ===
jump if `*`cx is null

===jmp ===
eip = operand

===jmpf ===
cs:eip = operands

===jCC ===
jump on condition

===enter===
= (push ebp/mov ebp, esp) op2+1 times, then esp -= op1

  * $enter$ 4,1 = push ebp/mov ebp, esp/ push ebp/ mov ebp, esp/ esp -= 4}

===leave===
= mov esp, ebp/pop ebp

===cmp ===
comparison by sub, discard result

===cmps===
cmp es:`[`esi`]`, ds:`[`edi`]` and inc (or dec) esi and edi

===scas===
cmp `*`ax, es:`[`edi`]` and inc (or dec) edi

===test ===
comparison by and, discard result

===push ===
push on stack:
{{{
start: push 12345678
=> esp -= 4
[esp] = 12345678
}}}

===pushf===
push EFLAGS on stack

===pusha===
push eax/ecx/edx/ebx/(original) esp/ebp/esi/edi

===pop===
pop from stack
{{{
start: [esp] = 12345678
pop eax
=> esp += 4 , eax = 12345678
}}}

===popf===
pop EFLAGS from stack
  * can be used to set TF, the trap flag. It will then trigger an exception after the next instruction.

===popa===
pop edi/esi/ebp/.../ebx/edx/ecx/eax

===smsw===
eax=cr0 (non privileged)

officially on ax only, 'undocumented' on eax, but in reality, reliable on eax.
====anti-debug====

===lahf===
ah=flag  (only the flags CF PF AF ZF SF)

===sahf===
flag=ah

===in===
read port

privileged

====anti-vmware====
vmware backdoor

===ins===
in es:`[`edi`]`, dx, inc (or dec) edi

===out===
write port - privileged

===outsd===
out dx, `[`esi`]`; inc (or dec) esi

===calls===
====call====
push eip of next instruction/eip = `<`operand`>`

works in 16b

====callf====
push cs, eip of next instruction/cs:eip = `<`operands`>`

===returns===
work in 16b

===ret====
pop eip / esp += `<`operand`>`

====retf====
pop eip / pop cs

====iret====
pop eip / pop cs + pop eflags

===cbw===
extend signed value from al to ax
{{{
start: al = 3
cbw
=> ax = 3
}}}

===cwd===
extend signed value from ax to dx:ax
{{{
start: ax = 3
cwd
=> dx = 0
}}}

===cwde===
extend signed value from ax to eax
{{{
start: ax = 3
cwde
=> eax = 3
}}}

===cdqe====
extend signed value from eax to rax

64 bits only
{{{
start: eax = 012345678h
cdqe
=> rax =  012345678h
}}}

===bsf===
scan for the first bit set:
{{{
start: eax = 0010100b
bsf ebx, eax
=> ebx = 2
}}}

====bsr====
same but from highest bit to lowest bit

===bt===
copy a specific bit to CF
{{{
start: ax, bx = 00100b, 2
bt ax,bx
=> CF = 1
}}}

====bts/btr/btc====
same as bt + set/reset/complement that bit

===stc/d/i===
set CF/DF (rep prefix)/IF (privileged)

====clc/d/i====
clear those flags

====cmc====
complement CF: CF = !CF

===int===
trigger interrupt `<`operand`>`

===into===
trigger interrupt 4 if OF is set

===xlat===
al = `[`ebx + al`]`
{{{
start: al, [ebx + 35] = 35, 75
xlatb
=> al = 75
}}}

segment overridable, but the segment might not be displayed in short form.

====xlatb====
xlat's rarer 16b counterpart al = `[`bx + al`]`. it might not be shown in short form.

===bound===
int5 if op1 < `[`op2`]` & op1 > `[`op2 + size`]`
{{{
start: eax, [ebx] = 136, [135, 143]
bound eax, ebx
=> nothing
}}}

a nop or an exception trigger => easy loop with a SEH.

===opsize===
turns dword operand into word
{{{
start: ecx = -1
66: inc ecx (=inc cx)
=> ecx = ffff0000
}}}

===addsize===
use 16b addressing mode
{{{
67:add [eax], eax
=> add [bx + si], eax
}}}

===bswap===
endian swapping
{{{
start: eax = 12345678h
bswap eax
=> eax = 78563412
}}}

*undocumented* on 16b: clears the register.
{{{
66 0FC8 bswap ax
=> ax = 0
}}}


===cmpxchg===
if (op1 == `*`ax) op1 = op2 else `*`ax = op1
{{{
start: al = 3; bl = 6
cmpxchg bl,cl
=> al = bl
}}}

===cmpxchg8b====
compare and exchange - memory based

{{{
start: eax:edx, ecx:ebx, [_cmpxchg8b] = 0a0a0a0a:d0d0d0d0, 99aabbcc:ddeeff00, 0d0d0d0d0:00a0a0a0a
cmpxchg8b [_cmpxchg8b]
=> [_cmpxchg8b] = ecx:ebx
}}}

source of the famous pentium bug

===cmpxchg16b====
cmpxchg8b's 64b counterpart
{{{
start: rax:rdx, rcx:rbx, [_cmpxchg16b] = 0a0a0a0a0a0a0a0a:d0d0d0d0d0d0d0d0, 99aabbcc99aabbcc:ddeeff00ddeeff00, 0d0d0d0d00d0d0d0d0:00a0a0a0a00a0a0a0a
cmpxchg16b [_cmpxchg16b]
=> [_cmpxchg16b] = rcx:rbx
}}}

===rdtsc===
=> edx:eax = timestamp counter. 

====anti-debug====
{{{
rdtsc
mov ebx, eax
mov ecx, edx
rdtsc
cmp eax, ebx
jle bad
cmp edx, ecx
jnz bad
}}}

===popcnt===
`<`target`>` =  number of bits set in `<`source`>`
{{{
start: ebx = 0100101010010b
popcnt eax, ebx
=> eax = 5
}}}
  * not supported by all cpus

===sidt===
store idt
{{{
sidt [eax]
=> [eax] = 7fff (XP) / 0fffh (W7)
}}}

===crc32===
updates a crc32c on the operand
{{{
start: eax , [ebx] = 0, 12345678h
crc32 eax, [ebx]
=> eax, 0fa745634h
}}}
  * not the standard crc32
  * not supported by all cpus
===sgdt===
store gdt
{{{
sgdt [eax]
=> [eax] = 3fff (XP) / (7fh)
}}}

====detector====

===sldt===
store ldt

{{{
sldt eax
=> eax = 0
}}}

always 0 under standard OS, not under virtual machines.

===cpuid===
get cpu info (brand, features, ...)

===lsl===
get segment limit
{{{
start: cx = cs
lsl eax, ecx
=> eax= -1
}}}

===str===
store task register
{{{
str ax
=> ax = 28 (XP) / 4000 (vmware)
}}}

special encoding. 16b or 32b bit on register, 16b on mem

===arpl===
compares lower 2 bits and copy if inferior
{{{
start: ax, bx = 1100b, 11b
arpl ax,bx
=> ax = 1111b
}}}

===lar===
check descriptor and get some parameter if existing
{{{
start: cx = cs
lar$ eax, ecx
=> eax = cff300
}}}

===ver`*`===
check segment accessibility (and readability or writability)
{{{
start: cx = cs
verr cx
=> cf = 1
}}}

===sysenter===
gateway to kernel
{{{
start: eax, [esp], edx = 0, @return, esp
sysenter
=> eip = return;...
}}}

===setCC ===
operand = condition ? 1 : 0
{{{
start: CF = 1
setc al
=> al = 1
}}}

===setalc===
al = cf ? -1 : 0
{{{
cf = 1
setalc
=> al = ff
}}}

==OS specifics==

==exception triggers==
===int3===
trigger interrupt 3, like int 3

special one byte encoding, for software breakpoint implementation

===hlt===
stops cpu. usually used to trigger PRIVILEGED_INSTRUCTION

===!IceBp===
triggers SINGLE_STEP exception

===ud1-ud2===
invalid opcodes. used as exceptions triggers for ILLEGAL_INSTRUCTION

===lock===
preserve memory content. picky prefix, mostly used to trigger exceptions