#summary hints and notes about puzzles (brainteasers)

I usually sort puzzles in 4 categories:
 * easy (one or 2 moves)
 * medium
 * hard: even if you solved them several times, it might still be a challenge a few days or weeks later.
 * impossible: the ones I've never been able to solve by myself.

standard rules:
 # take apart
  * without force or tools
 # put back together
  * at the actual original position, which is not always easy to remember

= Hanayama Cast puzzles =
very nice collection. worldwide available, small (fit in the pocket), good manufacturing (not too expensive, not too fragile), good variety of designs (they don't create their own puzzles, just licence designs)

== wrong ratings==
that are IMHO easy or medium despite their official hard ratings: nutcase (medium), square (easy or very easy), elk (medium), W-U (nothing special if you can solve the shoehorse one), chain (actually medium), news (actually medium)

== to avoid == 
I'd personally advise NOT to buy these:
 * key: nothing special compared to key 2, skip that one
 * seabream: cute fish, nothing special.
 * cage, star: nothing fun
 * W-U: superfluous if you have horse already
 * flag: not really fun. confusing starting position for guests.
 * cricket: far too fragile compared to other hanayama.
 * square: nice movement but disappointingly easy.

= extra=
my presentation at !HackPra, Bochum, 16 January 2013.

<wiki:video url="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hg7A7YIEWbU"/>
<wiki:gadget url="https://corkami.googlecode.com/svn/wiki/gadgets/hackpra_slideshare.xml" width=620 height=497 border=0/>